the core in school on real agriculture
calm is brought to you by BASF and pride
seeds
hi I'm Aaron Stannis mark development
agronomist pride seeds
we're in Perth County today and it's
raining what seems to be the usual right
now we've had some funny weather this
spring we've had three frost events some
more severe than others depending where
we are and also here in Perth County a
lot of rain so what we're gonna do today
is to around the truck and use the the
camera as our tool to go look at the
sins of the spring let's see what we can
learn for our management strategies for
next year
so in this field the grower use a roller
Packer which is normally you know a
fairly good idea it kind of firms up the
seedbed keeps good good seed to soil
contact on the soybeans but in this case
where we've had heavy rain we've
actually caught some ponding so what
happens is you since it is competitive
soil is a little bit compacted you don't
get the good water infiltration so you
don't get it percolating through if
you're to say to have a have a non
packed soil and you can actually cause
some ponding now this is obviously an
extreme condition because here in Perth
County we have had a lot of rain but
this is something that can happen if you
if if you do get extreme rains after
packing the next thing that that is an
issue if we do for example get some
extreme hot weather we can obviously get
a crust on this this soil here is is a
clay loam so it is a little finer soil
texture and what happens is as you get
the rain droplets you know and along
with that fine word soil it kind of
explodes the soil so it makes the even
finer and then the best way to think of
it it's just like putting using clay so
you got that clay it's fine and then you
get some really hot hot conditions with
wind and really warm sunlight and you
can actually cause a crust which which
makes it really hard for the soybeans to
come out as the as the meso coddles
trying to knuckle out of the soil it
keeps on pushing harder and harder and
sometimes you can actually break the
cotyledons right off which obviously
kills the soybeans so you know this is
one thing that it's a certain
circumstance it's not every year but
something that did happen this year with
all their heavy rain all right so here's
an example of two different different
soybeans in two different environments
so this one here this one came out of
the soil easily as you can see the
musical here isn't swollen it came up
the it knuckled here and actually the
cotyledons are turning green so it it
hit sunlight so this soybean was
emerging like it should this one on the
other hand has had some trouble as you
can see the music Caudill here is more
: then he than this one so it's actually
put it had to push through the dirt
harder so it was it was working harder
to make it through it was just starting
to knuckle so as you can see the knuckle
here was starting to turn green because
it was intercepting sunlight but the the
cotyledon was still yellow so as and
seen sunlight yet this beam will
probably be okay but it just shows the
difference between the two on how the
the beam has to work harder to make it
through tougher soil conditions well
lady to give kudos to the quarry did we
do have 30 percent residue cover on here
so definitely didn't overwork it
everything looks good that way
unfortunately the biggest issue here is
just too much rain we've had too much
rain in this area and that's causing all
this pond ponding one more other
management strategy is maybe to use a
crow foot Packer instead of a roller
Packer the roller Packer is just you
know firming up and compacting the
ground which you know like I said
earlier decreases water infiltration
where the crow foot Packer you wouldn't
have that issue
so we just got out of the truck to it
check the stand and emergence of the
this cornfield here it said about to
leaf as you can see it has had a little
bit of frost damage which isn't a big
deal because that to leaf the growing
point is still below the ground so as
long as we got some hot weather which is
coming up here it should easily grow up
grow out of it and this corn will be up
and ready to rock again the the stand on
this this field is pretty good it was it
was about six and a half inches spacing
which is right about 32 thousand plants
per acre tried to look for the other
thing you look at is emergence and there
there is a little bit of as some emerges
issued an uneven emergence in this field
so now is a great great opportunity to
to look at the importance of emergence
and what that can mean to you so as you
can see in the field here we have we
have two leaf corn just to the left of
this corn it is a later emergere you
know it's just kind of poking through
the ground and so you you can lose some
yield from this because it is to leave
behind so a great way to check this
throughout the season is is you can
stick a flag in it right now so the idea
is just take a flag in it and as you get
to harvest time go back and look at that
flag there chance that the odds are is
you're probably gonna have an
unharvested ear either you won't have an
ear or it'll be an ear that's so small
that'll just go right through the
combine so in a situation like this when
you have a corn plant that's about to
leaf behind and in one one thousandth of
an acre so if you count off if you pace
off seventeen and a half feet and you do
have one plant that's to leave behind
that can cost you full five bushels
roughly it's four to six bushels but on
average five bushels per acre so it's a
good idea to go out flag those fields
check them out and it'll be a really
neat learning opportunity for you come
harvest time to see what those ears end
up looking like so the question is how
do you fix this well there's three easy
ways to do that
first you er cultivate in the
cultivation process so make sure you're
cultivating left levelly and also
keeping a firm seed bed so the planter
doesn't drop in and you're also keeping
the seeds at a nice even depth the the
third part is is making sure your your
corn planters in good maintenance so
making sure your gauge wheels are all
even making sure your depths are are all
even and that means getting it out of
the tractor periodically while you're
planning to make sure you have even
depth right across your whole corn
planter
as you can see in the in the pictures
that this was finally fairly finely
worked soil bed and it got a pretty
heavy downpour so what happened was on
the along the outside of the field that
the water started to gain momentum and
as it gained momentum it started to
create a rill in the soil so it started
driving down picking up soil as it went
down the field and kind of dispersed it
in the low flat area of the field I
guess the question asks what can we do
in this field for next year to to
prevent this from happening again and
and one thing would be to leave a little
bit more residue and not work it it's
fine I know in corn we do like to have a
fine and firm seed bed for good seed to
soil contact but on fields such as this
with you know some topography where you
have a higher risk of erosion it
probably would be a good idea to leave
30% residue this would you know impede
the velocity the the momentum of the
water which would cause less erosion and
what you can do as a management thing on
your corn planner if you are using a
heavier residue is to use a row cleaner
on there it'll clean the clean away the
the residue so you can still be planning
into a good seed bed and you won't have
any any hair pinning it in the friends
in the trench as well
you